packages/logger/README.md, before:

# @chara-codes/logger

A flexible and customizable logging utility for Chara applications.

## Features

- Multiple log levels (TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, SUCCESS, WARNING, ERROR, EVENT, SERVER)
- Colorized console output for better readability
- Configurable transports
- Metadata support for detailed logging
- Runtime log level adjustment

## Installation

```bash
npm install @chara-codes/logger
```

## Features

- **Multiple log levels**: TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, SUCCESS, WARNING, ERROR, EVENT, SERVER
- **Configurable transports**: Custom output handlers for different log levels
- **Advanced variable dumping**: Rich, developer-friendly variable inspection
- **Circular reference detection**: Safe handling of complex object structures
- **Type information**: Optional type annotations for better debugging
- **Colored output**: Syntax highlighting for better readability
- **Flexible formatting**: Compact and detailed output modes

## Basic Usage

```typescript
import { logger } from '@chara-codes/logger';

// Use the default logger
logger.info('Application started');
logger.success('Operation completed successfully');
logger.warning('Something might be wrong');
logger.error('An error occurred', { error: 'Details here' });
logger.debug('Debug information');
logger.trace('Detailed trace info');
logger.event('User signed in', { userId: '123' });
logger.server('Server started on port 3000');

// Change log level at runtime
logger.setLevel('DEBUG'); // Only DEBUG and above will be logged
```

## Variable Dumping

The logger includes powerful variable dumping capabilities for inspecting complex data structures with rich formatting:

```typescript
import { logger, dump, dumpToConsole } from '@chara-codes/logger';

// Basic dump - outputs with INFO level
const user = {
  id: 1,
  name: "John Doe",
  preferences: {
    theme: "dark",
    notifications: { email: true, push: false }
  },
  hobbies: ["reading", "coding"],
  lastLogin: new Date()
};

logger.dump(user, "User Object");
// Output:
// ℹ User Object:
// { [Object (keys: 5)]
//   id: 1 [number, integer]
//   name: "John Doe" [string (length: 8)]
//   preferences: { [Object (keys: 2)]
//     theme: "dark" [string (length: 4)]
//     notifications: { [Object (keys: 2)]
//       email: true [boolean]
//       push: false [boolean]
//     }
//   }
//   hobbies: [ [Array (length: 2)]
//     0: "reading" [string (length: 7)]
//     1: "coding" [string (length: 6)]
//   ]
//   lastLogin: 2023-12-01T10:30:00.000Z [Date]
// }

// Different dump methods for different log levels
logger.dumpError(errorData, "Error Details");     // ERROR level
logger.dumpDebug(debugInfo, "Debug Info");        // DEBUG level  
logger.dumpCompact(stats, "Quick Stats");         // Compact format

// Standalone dump functions
console.log(dump(data));                          // Direct output
dumpToConsole(data, "Label", { colors: false });  // Console output with options

// Dump with custom options
logger.dump(data, "Custom", {
  maxDepth: 3,
  showTypes: false,
  compact: true,
  colors: false
});
```

### Dump Features

- **All Data Types**: Handles primitives, objects, arrays, Maps, Sets, functions, errors, etc.
- **Circular References**: Safely detects and displays circular references
- **Type Information**: Shows data types and additional info (string length, array size, etc.)
- **Depth Control**: Configurable maximum depth to prevent overwhelming output
- **Color Support**: Syntax highlighting for better readability
- **Compact Mode**: Condensed output for simple data structures
- **Custom Labels**: Add descriptive labels to dump output

## Creating a Custom Logger

```typescript
import { Logger, LogLevel } from '@chara-codes/logger';

// Create a custom logger
const customLogger = new Logger({
  name: 'MyService',
  levels: [LogLevel.INFO, LogLevel.WARNING, LogLevel.ERROR], // Only enable these levels
});

customLogger.info('This will be logged');
customLogger.debug('This will NOT be logged'); // DEBUG level not enabled
```

## Custom Transports

```typescript
import { Logger, LogLevel, TransportType } from '@chara-codes/logger';

// Create a custom transport
const fileTransport: TransportType = (level, message, metadata) => {
  // Implementation for writing to a file
  const logEntry = {
    timestamp: new Date().toISOString(),
    level,
    message,
    metadata
  };

  // Write to file (implementation details omitted)
  console.log(`[File Transport] Would write: ${JSON.stringify(logEntry)}`);
};

// Create logger with custom transport
const fileLogger = new Logger({
  name: 'FileLogger',
  transports: {
    [LogLevel.ERROR]: [fileTransport],  // Only errors go to file
  }
});

fileLogger.error('This error will be sent to the file transport');
```

## API Reference

### Log Levels

The logger supports the following levels (in order of increasing severity):

- `TRACE`: Most verbose level for detailed tracing
- `DEBUG`: Debug information for development
- `INFO`: General information
- `SUCCESS`: Successful operations
- `WARNING`: Warnings that don't prevent operation
- `ERROR`: Errors that might prevent proper operation
- `EVENT`: Special events in the application
- `SERVER`: Server-related information

### Methods

- `debug(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at DEBUG level
- `trace(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at TRACE level
- `info(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at INFO level
- `success(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at SUCCESS level
- `warning(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at WARNING level
- `error(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at ERROR level
- `event(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at EVENT level
- `server(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at SERVER level
- `setLevel(level: string)`: Set minimum log level
- `getLevel(): string`: Get current log level

### Dump Methods

- `dump(data: unknown, label?: string, options?: DumpOptions)`: Dump variable with INFO level
- `dumpError(data: unknown, label?: string)`: Dump variable with ERROR level  
- `dumpDebug(data: unknown, label?: string)`: Dump variable with DEBUG level
- `dumpCompact(data: unknown, label?: string)`: Dump variable in compact format

### Standalone Dump Functions

- `dump(data: unknown, options?: DumpOptions)`: Direct dump without logger
- `dumpToConsole(data: unknown, label?: string, options?: DumpOptions)`: Console dump
- `Dumper`: Class for creating custom dumpers with specific options

### DumpOptions

```typescript
interface DumpOptions {
  maxDepth?: number;        // Maximum nesting depth (default: 5)
  maxArrayLength?: number;  // Maximum array items shown (default: 100)
  maxStringLength?: number; // Maximum string length (default: 200)
  showTypes?: boolean;      // Show type information (default: true)
  colors?: boolean;         // Enable colored output (default: true)
  indent?: string;          // Indentation string (default: "  ")
  compact?: boolean;        // Use compact format (default: false)
}
```

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Switch license from MIT to Apache 2.0

packages/logger/README.md, after:

# @chara-codes/logger

A flexible and customizable logging utility for Chara applications.

## Features

- Multiple log levels (TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, SUCCESS, WARNING, ERROR, EVENT, SERVER)
- Colorized console output for better readability
- Configurable transports
- Metadata support for detailed logging
- Runtime log level adjustment

## Installation

```bash
npm install @chara-codes/logger
```

## Features

- **Multiple log levels**: TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, SUCCESS, WARNING, ERROR, EVENT, SERVER
- **Configurable transports**: Custom output handlers for different log levels
- **Advanced variable dumping**: Rich, developer-friendly variable inspection
- **Circular reference detection**: Safe handling of complex object structures
- **Type information**: Optional type annotations for better debugging
- **Colored output**: Syntax highlighting for better readability
- **Flexible formatting**: Compact and detailed output modes

## Basic Usage

```typescript
import { logger } from '@chara-codes/logger';

// Use the default logger
logger.info('Application started');
logger.success('Operation completed successfully');
logger.warning('Something might be wrong');
logger.error('An error occurred', { error: 'Details here' });
logger.debug('Debug information');
logger.trace('Detailed trace info');
logger.event('User signed in', { userId: '123' });
logger.server('Server started on port 3000');

// Change log level at runtime
logger.setLevel('DEBUG'); // Only DEBUG and above will be logged
```

## Variable Dumping

The logger includes powerful variable dumping capabilities for inspecting complex data structures with rich formatting:

```typescript
import { logger, dump, dumpToConsole } from '@chara-codes/logger';

// Basic dump - outputs with INFO level
const user = {
  id: 1,
  name: "John Doe",
  preferences: {
    theme: "dark",
    notifications: { email: true, push: false }
  },
  hobbies: ["reading", "coding"],
  lastLogin: new Date()
};

logger.dump(user, "User Object");
// Output:
// ℹ User Object:
// { [Object (keys: 5)]
//   id: 1 [number, integer]
//   name: "John Doe" [string (length: 8)]
//   preferences: { [Object (keys: 2)]
//     theme: "dark" [string (length: 4)]
//     notifications: { [Object (keys: 2)]
//       email: true [boolean]
//       push: false [boolean]
//     }
//   }
//   hobbies: [ [Array (length: 2)]
//     0: "reading" [string (length: 7)]
//     1: "coding" [string (length: 6)]
//   ]
//   lastLogin: 2023-12-01T10:30:00.000Z [Date]
// }

// Different dump methods for different log levels
logger.dumpError(errorData, "Error Details");     // ERROR level
logger.dumpDebug(debugInfo, "Debug Info");        // DEBUG level  
logger.dumpCompact(stats, "Quick Stats");         // Compact format

// Standalone dump functions
console.log(dump(data));                          // Direct output
dumpToConsole(data, "Label", { colors: false });  // Console output with options

// Dump with custom options
logger.dump(data, "Custom", {
  maxDepth: 3,
  showTypes: false,
  compact: true,
  colors: false
});
```

### Dump Features

- **All Data Types**: Handles primitives, objects, arrays, Maps, Sets, functions, errors, etc.
- **Circular References**: Safely detects and displays circular references
- **Type Information**: Shows data types and additional info (string length, array size, etc.)
- **Depth Control**: Configurable maximum depth to prevent overwhelming output
- **Color Support**: Syntax highlighting for better readability
- **Compact Mode**: Condensed output for simple data structures
- **Custom Labels**: Add descriptive labels to dump output

## Creating a Custom Logger

```typescript
import { Logger, LogLevel } from '@chara-codes/logger';

// Create a custom logger
const customLogger = new Logger({
  name: 'MyService',
  levels: [LogLevel.INFO, LogLevel.WARNING, LogLevel.ERROR], // Only enable these levels
});

customLogger.info('This will be logged');
customLogger.debug('This will NOT be logged'); // DEBUG level not enabled
```

## Custom Transports

```typescript
import { Logger, LogLevel, TransportType } from '@chara-codes/logger';

// Create a custom transport
const fileTransport: TransportType = (level, message, metadata) => {
  // Implementation for writing to a file
  const logEntry = {
    timestamp: new Date().toISOString(),
    level,
    message,
    metadata
  };

  // Write to file (implementation details omitted)
  console.log(`[File Transport] Would write: ${JSON.stringify(logEntry)}`);
};

// Create logger with custom transport
const fileLogger = new Logger({
  name: 'FileLogger',
  transports: {
    [LogLevel.ERROR]: [fileTransport],  // Only errors go to file
  }
});

fileLogger.error('This error will be sent to the file transport');
```

## API Reference

### Log Levels

The logger supports the following levels (in order of increasing severity):

- `TRACE`: Most verbose level for detailed tracing
- `DEBUG`: Debug information for development
- `INFO`: General information
- `SUCCESS`: Successful operations
- `WARNING`: Warnings that don't prevent operation
- `ERROR`: Errors that might prevent proper operation
- `EVENT`: Special events in the application
- `SERVER`: Server-related information

### Methods

- `debug(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at DEBUG level
- `trace(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at TRACE level
- `info(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at INFO level
- `success(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at SUCCESS level
- `warning(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at WARNING level
- `error(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at ERROR level
- `event(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at EVENT level
- `server(message: string, metadata?: any)`: Log at SERVER level
- `setLevel(level: string)`: Set minimum log level
- `getLevel(): string`: Get current log level

### Dump Methods

- `dump(data: unknown, label?: string, options?: DumpOptions)`: Dump variable with INFO level
- `dumpError(data: unknown, label?: string)`: Dump variable with ERROR level  
- `dumpDebug(data: unknown, label?: string)`: Dump variable with DEBUG level
- `dumpCompact(data: unknown, label?: string)`: Dump variable in compact format

### Standalone Dump Functions

- `dump(data: unknown, options?: DumpOptions)`: Direct dump without logger
- `dumpToConsole(data: unknown, label?: string, options?: DumpOptions)`: Console dump
- `Dumper`: Class for creating custom dumpers with specific options

### DumpOptions

```typescript
interface DumpOptions {
  maxDepth?: number;        // Maximum nesting depth (default: 5)
  maxArrayLength?: number;  // Maximum array items shown (default: 100)
  maxStringLength?: number; // Maximum string length (default: 200)
  showTypes?: boolean;      // Show type information (default: true)
  colors?: boolean;         // Enable colored output (default: true)
  indent?: string;          // Indentation string (default: "  ")
  compact?: boolean;        // Use compact format (default: false)
}
```

## License

Apache License 2.0

Copyright (c) 2025 Chara Codes

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

See the main [LICENSE](../../LICENSE) file for details.
