packages/settings/README.md, before:

# @chara-codes/settings

A comprehensive utility package for managing different types of settings in the Chara CLI ecosystem, including global configuration and environment management.

## Features

- **Environment Management**: Cross-platform environment variable handling
- **Global Configuration**: Read, write, update, and manage global configuration files
- **Models Whitelist Management**: Manage AI models whitelist with default curated models and custom user additions
- **Home Directory Detection**: Automatic detection of user home directories across platforms
- **Configuration Lifecycle**: Complete CRUD operations for configuration files
- **Type Safety**: Full TypeScript support with proper type definitions

## Installation

```bash
bun install @chara-codes/settings
```

## Usage

### Environment Utilities

The `env` utility provides a consistent interface for accessing environment variables and system information:

```typescript
import { env } from "@chara-codes/settings";

const environment = env();
console.log(environment.homeDir);   // User's home directory (cross-platform)
```

### Global Configuration Management

The global configuration utilities provide a complete set of functions for managing configuration files:

```typescript
import {
  readGlobalConfig,
  writeGlobalConfig,
  updateGlobalConfig,
  existsGlobalConfig,
  removeGlobalConfig,
  getPathToGlobalConfig,
  getVarFromEnvOrGlobalConfig
} from "@chara-codes/settings";

// Check if config exists
const configExists = await existsGlobalConfig();

// Write new configuration
await writeGlobalConfig({
  projectName: "my-app",
  version: "1.0.0",
  settings: {
    debug: true,
    port: 3000
  }
});

// Read existing configuration
const config = await readGlobalConfig();

// Update configuration (merges with existing)
await updateGlobalConfig({
  version: "1.1.0",
  settings: {
    debug: false,
    newFeature: true
  }
});

// Get path to config file
const configPath = getPathToGlobalConfig();

// Remove configuration
await removeGlobalConfig();

// Get variable from environment or global config `env` field
const param = getVarFromEnvOrGlobalConfig('VAR_NAME')
```

### Models Whitelist Management

The models utilities provide comprehensive management for AI models whitelist:

```typescript
import {
  getModelsWhitelist,
  setModelsWhitelist,
  addCustomModel,
  removeCustomModel,
  getCustomModels,
  getRecommendedModels,
  getApprovedModels,
  getModelsByProvider,
  getModelsWithTools,
  findModelById,
  isModelWhitelisted,
  resetModelsWhitelist,
  DEFAULT_MODELS_WHITELIST,
  ModelConfig
} from "@chara-codes/settings";

// Get current models whitelist (default + custom)
const models = await getModelsWhitelist();

// Add a custom model
await addCustomModel({
  id: "custom-model-id",
  name: "My Custom Model",
  provider: "custom-provider",
  contextSize: 128000,
  hasTools: true,
  recommended: true,
  approved: true
});

// Get only custom models
const customModels = await getCustomModels();

// Get recommended models
const recommendedModels = await getRecommendedModels();

// Get models by provider
const googleModels = await getModelsByProvider("google");

// Get models with tool support
const modelsWithTools = await getModelsWithTools();

// Find specific model
const model = await findModelById("gpt-4o");

// Check if model is whitelisted
const isWhitelisted = await isModelWhitelisted("claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022");

// Set custom whitelist (replaces default)
await setModelsWhitelist(customModels);

// Reset to default whitelist
await resetModelsWhitelist();

// Remove custom model
await removeCustomModel("custom-model-id");
```

### Custom Configuration Files

All configuration functions support custom file names:

```typescript
// Use custom config file
await writeGlobalConfig(config, ".my-custom-config");
await readGlobalConfig(".my-custom-config");
await updateGlobalConfig(updates, ".my-custom-config");
```

## API Reference

### Environment Interface

```typescript
interface Env {
  homeDir: string;    // User's home directory
}
```

### Model Configuration Interface

```typescript
interface ModelConfig {
  id: string;           // Unique model identifier
  name: string;         // Human-readable model name
  provider: string;     // Model provider (google, openai, anthropic, etc.)
  contextSize: number;  // Maximum context window size
  hasTools: boolean;    // Whether model supports tool calling
  recommended: boolean; // Whether model is recommended for general use
  approved: boolean;    // Whether model is approved for use
}
```

### Global Configuration Functions

- `getPathToGlobalConfig(file?: string)`: Get full path to configuration file
- `readGlobalConfig(file?: string)`: Read and parse configuration file
- `writeGlobalConfig(config: any, file?: string)`: Write configuration to file
- `updateGlobalConfig(config: any, file?: string)`: Merge updates with existing config
- `existsGlobalConfig(file?: string)`: Check if configuration file exists
- `removeGlobalConfig(file?: string)`: Delete configuration file
- `getVarFromEnvOrGlobalConfig(name: string)`: Get variable from environment or global config `env` field

### Models Management Functions

- `getModelsWhitelist()`: Get current models whitelist (default + custom)
- `setModelsWhitelist(models: ModelConfig[])`: Set custom models whitelist
- `addCustomModel(model: ModelConfig)`: Add or update custom model
- `removeCustomModel(modelId: string)`: Remove custom model
- `getCustomModels()`: Get only user-added custom models
- `resetModelsWhitelist()`: Reset to default whitelist and clear custom models
- `getRecommendedModels()`: Get only recommended models
- `getApprovedModels()`: Get only approved models
- `getModelsByProvider(provider: string)`: Get models by specific provider
- `getModelsWithTools()`: Get models that support tool calling
- `findModelById(modelId: string)`: Find specific model by ID
- `isModelWhitelisted(modelId: string)`: Check if model is in whitelist

## Default Configuration

- **Default config file**: `.chararc`
- **Location**: User's home directory
- **Format**: JSON with pretty-printing (2-space indentation)
- **Cross-platform**: Supports Windows (`USERPROFILE`) and Unix-like systems (`HOME`)

## Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
bun test
```

The package includes comprehensive tests covering:
- Configuration file lifecycle management
- Models whitelist management and operations
- Custom models addition and removal
- Model filtering and querying functions
- Error handling for missing files
- Cross-platform compatibility
- JSON serialization/deserialization
- Configuration merging behavior

## Development

```bash
# Install dependencies
bun install

# Build the package
bun run build

# Run tests
bun test

# Development mode with watch
bun run dev
```

## Type Safety

This package is built with TypeScript and provides full type definitions. All functions are properly typed, and the package supports both CommonJS and ES modules.

## Changes Summary

### Version 0.1.0 - Models Whitelist Management

This release adds comprehensive AI models whitelist management functionality to the @chara-codes/settings package:

#### New Features
- **Default Models Whitelist**: Curated list of 35+ high-quality AI models from major providers
- **Custom Models Support**: Add, update, and remove custom models in user configuration
- **Smart Filtering**: Filter models by provider, tool support, recommendation status, and approval
- **Whitelist Management**: Complete CRUD operations for models whitelist
- **Type Safety**: Full TypeScript support with `ModelConfig` interface

#### Supported Providers
- Google (Gemini 2.5 Pro/Flash, various versions)
- Anthropic (Claude 4, Claude 3.7/3.5 Sonnet, Haiku)
- OpenAI (GPT-4.1, GPT-4o variants)
- OpenRouter (proxy for multiple providers)
- Mistral (Large, Codestral, Nemo)
- DeepSeek (Chat, Reasoner)
- DIAL (enterprise gateway)

#### Key Benefits
- **Curated Quality**: Default whitelist includes only approved, high-quality models
- **Extensible**: Users can add custom models while keeping defaults
- **Flexible**: Filter by any combination of provider, tools, recommendation status
- **Persistent**: Configuration stored in global settings file
- **Type-Safe**: Full TypeScript definitions and compile-time checking

---

This project is part of the Chara CLI ecosystem and uses [Bun](https://bun.sh) as the runtime and package manager.

Commit message:

Switch license from MIT to Apache 2.0

packages/settings/README.md, after:

# @chara-codes/settings

A comprehensive utility package for managing different types of settings in the Chara CLI ecosystem, including global configuration and environment management.

## Features

- **Environment Management**: Cross-platform environment variable handling
- **Global Configuration**: Read, write, update, and manage global configuration files
- **Models Whitelist Management**: Manage AI models whitelist with default curated models and custom user additions
- **Home Directory Detection**: Automatic detection of user home directories across platforms
- **Configuration Lifecycle**: Complete CRUD operations for configuration files
- **Type Safety**: Full TypeScript support with proper type definitions

## Installation

```bash
bun install @chara-codes/settings
```

## Usage

### Environment Utilities

The `env` utility provides a consistent interface for accessing environment variables and system information:

```typescript
import { env } from "@chara-codes/settings";

const environment = env();
console.log(environment.homeDir);   // User's home directory (cross-platform)
```

### Global Configuration Management

The global configuration utilities provide a complete set of functions for managing configuration files:

```typescript
import {
  readGlobalConfig,
  writeGlobalConfig,
  updateGlobalConfig,
  existsGlobalConfig,
  removeGlobalConfig,
  getPathToGlobalConfig,
  getVarFromEnvOrGlobalConfig
} from "@chara-codes/settings";

// Check if config exists
const configExists = await existsGlobalConfig();

// Write new configuration
await writeGlobalConfig({
  projectName: "my-app",
  version: "1.0.0",
  settings: {
    debug: true,
    port: 3000
  }
});

// Read existing configuration
const config = await readGlobalConfig();

// Update configuration (merges with existing)
await updateGlobalConfig({
  version: "1.1.0",
  settings: {
    debug: false,
    newFeature: true
  }
});

// Get path to config file
const configPath = getPathToGlobalConfig();

// Remove configuration
await removeGlobalConfig();

// Get variable from environment or global config `env` field
const param = getVarFromEnvOrGlobalConfig('VAR_NAME')
```

### Models Whitelist Management

The models utilities provide comprehensive management for AI models whitelist:

```typescript
import {
  getModelsWhitelist,
  setModelsWhitelist,
  addCustomModel,
  removeCustomModel,
  getCustomModels,
  getRecommendedModels,
  getApprovedModels,
  getModelsByProvider,
  getModelsWithTools,
  findModelById,
  isModelWhitelisted,
  resetModelsWhitelist,
  DEFAULT_MODELS_WHITELIST,
  ModelConfig
} from "@chara-codes/settings";

// Get current models whitelist (default + custom)
const models = await getModelsWhitelist();

// Add a custom model
await addCustomModel({
  id: "custom-model-id",
  name: "My Custom Model",
  provider: "custom-provider",
  contextSize: 128000,
  hasTools: true,
  recommended: true,
  approved: true
});

// Get only custom models
const customModels = await getCustomModels();

// Get recommended models
const recommendedModels = await getRecommendedModels();

// Get models by provider
const googleModels = await getModelsByProvider("google");

// Get models with tool support
const modelsWithTools = await getModelsWithTools();

// Find specific model
const model = await findModelById("gpt-4o");

// Check if model is whitelisted
const isWhitelisted = await isModelWhitelisted("claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022");

// Set custom whitelist (replaces default)
await setModelsWhitelist(customModels);

// Reset to default whitelist
await resetModelsWhitelist();

// Remove custom model
await removeCustomModel("custom-model-id");
```

### Custom Configuration Files

All configuration functions support custom file names:

```typescript
// Use custom config file
await writeGlobalConfig(config, ".my-custom-config");
await readGlobalConfig(".my-custom-config");
await updateGlobalConfig(updates, ".my-custom-config");
```

## API Reference

### Environment Interface

```typescript
interface Env {
  homeDir: string;    // User's home directory
}
```

### Model Configuration Interface

```typescript
interface ModelConfig {
  id: string;           // Unique model identifier
  name: string;         // Human-readable model name
  provider: string;     // Model provider (google, openai, anthropic, etc.)
  contextSize: number;  // Maximum context window size
  hasTools: boolean;    // Whether model supports tool calling
  recommended: boolean; // Whether model is recommended for general use
  approved: boolean;    // Whether model is approved for use
}
```

### Global Configuration Functions

- `getPathToGlobalConfig(file?: string)`: Get full path to configuration file
- `readGlobalConfig(file?: string)`: Read and parse configuration file
- `writeGlobalConfig(config: any, file?: string)`: Write configuration to file
- `updateGlobalConfig(config: any, file?: string)`: Merge updates with existing config
- `existsGlobalConfig(file?: string)`: Check if configuration file exists
- `removeGlobalConfig(file?: string)`: Delete configuration file
- `getVarFromEnvOrGlobalConfig(name: string)`: Get variable from environment or global config `env` field

### Models Management Functions

- `getModelsWhitelist()`: Get current models whitelist (default + custom)
- `setModelsWhitelist(models: ModelConfig[])`: Set custom models whitelist
- `addCustomModel(model: ModelConfig)`: Add or update custom model
- `removeCustomModel(modelId: string)`: Remove custom model
- `getCustomModels()`: Get only user-added custom models
- `resetModelsWhitelist()`: Reset to default whitelist and clear custom models
- `getRecommendedModels()`: Get only recommended models
- `getApprovedModels()`: Get only approved models
- `getModelsByProvider(provider: string)`: Get models by specific provider
- `getModelsWithTools()`: Get models that support tool calling
- `findModelById(modelId: string)`: Find specific model by ID
- `isModelWhitelisted(modelId: string)`: Check if model is in whitelist

## Default Configuration

- **Default config file**: `.chararc`
- **Location**: User's home directory
- **Format**: JSON with pretty-printing (2-space indentation)
- **Cross-platform**: Supports Windows (`USERPROFILE`) and Unix-like systems (`HOME`)

## Testing

Run the test suite:

```bash
bun test
```

The package includes comprehensive tests covering:
- Configuration file lifecycle management
- Models whitelist management and operations
- Custom models addition and removal
- Model filtering and querying functions
- Error handling for missing files
- Cross-platform compatibility
- JSON serialization/deserialization
- Configuration merging behavior

## Development

```bash
# Install dependencies
bun install

# Build the package
bun run build

# Run tests
bun test

# Development mode with watch
bun run dev
```

## Type Safety

This package is built with TypeScript and provides full type definitions. All functions are properly typed, and the package supports both CommonJS and ES modules.

## Changes Summary

### Version 0.1.0 - Models Whitelist Management

This release adds comprehensive AI models whitelist management functionality to the @chara-codes/settings package:

#### New Features
- **Default Models Whitelist**: Curated list of 35+ high-quality AI models from major providers
- **Custom Models Support**: Add, update, and remove custom models in user configuration
- **Smart Filtering**: Filter models by provider, tool support, recommendation status, and approval
- **Whitelist Management**: Complete CRUD operations for models whitelist
- **Type Safety**: Full TypeScript support with `ModelConfig` interface

#### Supported Providers
- Google (Gemini 2.5 Pro/Flash, various versions)
- Anthropic (Claude 4, Claude 3.7/3.5 Sonnet, Haiku)
- OpenAI (GPT-4.1, GPT-4o variants)
- OpenRouter (proxy for multiple providers)
- Mistral (Large, Codestral, Nemo)
- DeepSeek (Chat, Reasoner)
- DIAL (enterprise gateway)

#### Key Benefits
- **Curated Quality**: Default whitelist includes only approved, high-quality models
- **Extensible**: Users can add custom models while keeping defaults
- **Flexible**: Filter by any combination of provider, tools, recommendation status
- **Persistent**: Configuration stored in global settings file
- **Type-Safe**: Full TypeScript definitions and compile-time checking

## License

Apache License 2.0

Copyright (c) 2025 Chara Codes

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

See the main [LICENSE](../../LICENSE) file for details.

---

This project is part of the Chara CLI ecosystem and uses [Bun](https://bun.sh) as the runtime and package manager.
