packages/server/README.md, before:

# @chara/server

A backend server for the Chara AI chat application, providing AI-powered chat, code generation, and document management capabilities through a modern tRPC API.

## Features

- **tRPC API**: Type-safe API for client-server communication
- **WebSocket Support**: Real-time communication for chat functionality
- **AI Integration**: Multiple AI provider support (OpenAI, Anthropic, Azure, etc.)
- **Database Integration**: SQLite/LibSQL database with Drizzle ORM
- **Streaming Responses**: Support for streaming AI responses
- **Typed Events**: Type-safe event emitter system
- **Advanced Logging**: Structured, colored logging system

## Installation

```bash
# From the root of the monorepo
bun install

# Or directly in the server package
cd packages/server
bun install
```

## Configuration

Create a `.env` file in the `packages/server` directory with the following variables:

```bash
# Database configuration
DATABASE_URL="file:chara.db"
DATABASE_AUTH_TOKEN=""

# AI provider configuration
AI_KEY="your-api-key"
AI_URL="https://api.openai.com/v1"  # Or other provider URLs
AI_MODEL="gpt-4o-mini"  # Default model to use
```

### Supported AI Providers

The server automatically detects the AI provider based on the API URL:

- OpenAI: `https://api.openai.com/v1`
- Azure OpenAI: `https://{resource-name}.azure.com/openai`
- Anthropic: `https://api.anthropic.com/v1`
- Cohere: `https://api.cohere.ai/v1`
- Perplexity: `https://api.perplexity.ai/v1`
- Mistral: `https://api.mistral.ai/v1`
- Deepseek: `https://api.deepseek.com/v1`
- Ollama: `http://localhost:11434/v1` or any URL containing "ollama"
- DeepInfra: `https://api.deepinfra.com/v1`

## Database Setup

This project uses Drizzle ORM with SQLite/LibSQL. To set up the database:

```bash
# Generate migrations from schema
bun db:generate

# Push schema changes to the database
bun db:push

# Launch Drizzle Studio for visual database management
bun db:studio
```

## Usage

### Development

Start the development server with hot reloading:

```bash
bun dev
```

### Production

Build and start the production server:

```bash
bun build
bun start
```

### Testing

Run tests with Vitest:

```bash
bun test
```

## API Endpoints

The server exposes the following main endpoints:

- `GET /trpc/*`: tRPC HTTP endpoints
- `WS /events`: WebSocket endpoint for real-time communication
- `GET /chat`: Streaming chat responses

## Architecture

The server is structured into the following main components:

- `src/api`: tRPC routers and API definitions
- `src/ai`: AI providers, tools and agents
- `src/db`: Database schema and utilities
- `src/utils`: Utility functions and helpers

## tRPC Client Example

```typescript
import { createTRPCProxyClient, httpBatchLink } from '@trpc/client';
import type { AppRouter } from '@chara/server';

const client = createTRPCProxyClient<AppRouter>({
  links: [
    httpBatchLink({
      url: 'http://localhost:3030/trpc',
    }),
  ],
});

// Example: Query the API
async function main() {
  const response = await client.messages.ask.query({
    question: "What is Chara?",
  });

  for await (const chunk of response) {
    process.stdout.write(chunk);
  }
}
```

## License

This project is proprietary and confidential. All rights reserved.

Commit message:

Add MIT license and update license information

packages/server/README.md, after:

# @chara/server

A backend server for the Chara AI chat application, providing AI-powered chat, code generation, and document management capabilities through a modern tRPC API.

## Features

- **tRPC API**: Type-safe API for client-server communication
- **WebSocket Support**: Real-time communication for chat functionality
- **AI Integration**: Multiple AI provider support (OpenAI, Anthropic, Azure, etc.)
- **Database Integration**: SQLite/LibSQL database with Drizzle ORM
- **Streaming Responses**: Support for streaming AI responses
- **Typed Events**: Type-safe event emitter system
- **Advanced Logging**: Structured, colored logging system

## Installation

```bash
# From the root of the monorepo
bun install

# Or directly in the server package
cd packages/server
bun install
```

## Configuration

Create a `.env` file in the `packages/server` directory with the following variables:

```bash
# Database configuration
DATABASE_URL="file:chara.db"
DATABASE_AUTH_TOKEN=""

# AI provider configuration
AI_KEY="your-api-key"
AI_URL="https://api.openai.com/v1"  # Or other provider URLs
AI_MODEL="gpt-4o-mini"  # Default model to use
```

### Supported AI Providers

The server automatically detects the AI provider based on the API URL:

- OpenAI: `https://api.openai.com/v1`
- Azure OpenAI: `https://{resource-name}.azure.com/openai`
- Anthropic: `https://api.anthropic.com/v1`
- Cohere: `https://api.cohere.ai/v1`
- Perplexity: `https://api.perplexity.ai/v1`
- Mistral: `https://api.mistral.ai/v1`
- Deepseek: `https://api.deepseek.com/v1`
- Ollama: `http://localhost:11434/v1` or any URL containing "ollama"
- DeepInfra: `https://api.deepinfra.com/v1`

## Database Setup

This project uses Drizzle ORM with SQLite/LibSQL. To set up the database:

```bash
# Generate migrations from schema
bun db:generate

# Push schema changes to the database
bun db:push

# Launch Drizzle Studio for visual database management
bun db:studio
```

## Usage

### Development

Start the development server with hot reloading:

```bash
bun dev
```

### Production

Build and start the production server:

```bash
bun build
bun start
```

### Testing

Run tests with Vitest:

```bash
bun test
```

## API Endpoints

The server exposes the following main endpoints:

- `GET /trpc/*`: tRPC HTTP endpoints
- `WS /events`: WebSocket endpoint for real-time communication
- `GET /chat`: Streaming chat responses

## Architecture

The server is structured into the following main components:

- `src/api`: tRPC routers and API definitions
- `src/ai`: AI providers, tools and agents
- `src/db`: Database schema and utilities
- `src/utils`: Utility functions and helpers

## tRPC Client Example

```typescript
import { createTRPCProxyClient, httpBatchLink } from '@trpc/client';
import type { AppRouter } from '@chara/server';

const client = createTRPCProxyClient<AppRouter>({
  links: [
    httpBatchLink({
      url: 'http://localhost:3030/trpc',
    }),
  ],
});

// Example: Query the API
async function main() {
  const response = await client.messages.ask.query({
    question: "What is Chara?",
  });

  for await (const chunk of response) {
    process.stdout.write(chunk);
  }
}
```

## License

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 Chara Codes

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the main [LICENSE](../../LICENSE) file for details.
